--- 
layout: post 
title: "July 12th" 
date: 2022-07-12 12:22:00 -0400 
categories: dad-cardiac 
---

Dad noticed a high heart rate earlier this year. It stabilized with no intervention. Starting on July 6th, however, Dad started to experience [bradycardia](https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/arrhythmia/about-arrhythmia/bradycardia--slow-heart-rate#:~:text=Bradycardia%20is%20a%20heart%20rate,But%20there%20are%20exceptions), but with no other significant symptoms of any kind. Mom was concerned and started monitoring his heart rate, BP and SPO2 readings religiously. His BP was great, with readings like 136/60, 111/73, 126/55. His SPO2 readings were consistently at 98%. His heart rate, however hovered between 35 and 44, sometimes going as low as 31.Sh Started reading everything she could about causes and concerns of low heart rate.

On Monday 7/11 Mom stared telling Dad that he HAD to go to urgent care. At that time it "looked" very much like it could be Lyme Cardiosis, but that would need to be treated right away. She told Dad though that there was a real chance that folks at Urgent Care would be very nervous and want to send him over to MGH. Mom spent night pulling together a timeline of everything that had happened and making sure that she had all the records that she might need to show the doctor.

On Tuesday, Mom was able to get an appointment at Nantucket Urgent Care. They were terrified of Dad's numbers and immediately sent him to the Emergency Room. There, despite a consistent 98% blood/oxygen reading, and stable blood pressure, they immediately attached paddles to his chest said he had to be medivaced to Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) ASAP. A call was put in for the Medivacs and Mom raced home to get Bela set up, pack some clothes, their shower kits and computers and chargers, a couple books and that's about it before returning to the hospital. All along the way, she was texting people about taking care of Bela, and texting me an my brothers about what was going to happen. She had to literally throw her life together in 90 minutes before flying to an unknown situation at MGH. 

As soon at the EMTs arrived, they took off the paddles affixed to Dad's chest (each coming off with lots of hair) and attached their own. They inserted a new IV lead and asked Mom and Dad a ton of questions. Both Mom and Dad had to sign consent forms again Mom is terrified of helicopters, but she convinced the pilot and each of the two EMTs (they all had veto power) to allow her to fly with Dad. Apparently the nurses said that there was no way Mom would be let on the helicopter. Dad told them that they didn't know Mom, and that if they were betting they should bet on her making it on the flight. 

Mom and Dad said that the EMT's and Pilot were incredibly competent and really really nice. This made the very cool flight much less scary even though it still was for Mom (she had some meds). But despite being petrified, it never occurred to Mom not to go along with Dad. Afterwards, Mom said that the helicopter was one of the best engineered, organized and decked out vehicles she'd ever been in. The equipment was top-of-the line, and incredibly maintained. She later found out that the Pilot and EMT's were part of a team of 40 that fly out of Plymouth and are said to be were some of the best in the world. 

Meanwhile, Liam had purchased and set up a mattress in his room for Mom, alerted his Research Supervisor about the situation, and mobilized many of his friends to help with driving, and was at the hospital to meet up with Mom and Dad at later in the evening.

As soon as Mom and Dad arrived in the room at MGH, the nurses took off the paddles affixed to Dad's chest (each coming off again with lots of hair!) and attached their own. They drew blood, had x-rays done, and asked Dad and Mom the same questions over and over again. Mom had to pull out the timeline and six or seven times to show each new doctor that came into the room. Meanwhile everyone was VERY nervous. Dad had a defibulator right at the foot of his bed at all times.

Dad's EKGs and heart rate, showed that he has a complete [heart block](https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/heart-block/#:~:text=Heart%20block%20is%20a%20condition,control%20how%20your%20heart%20beats). As MGH is a teaching hospital, every conclusion has involved an astoundingly large number of physicians/decision makers (sometimes 20 at a time), as well as nurses, who make pretty much all of the tactical decisions throughout the day. Adding to the decision-making cacophony, is the fact that the entire group rotates every 10 hours or so, and that most if not all of the physicians have the authority to alter medications, etc. essentially at any time.

Nearly every doctor who came in the room had no idea what was going on with Dad or what each of the previous doctors had done or said. Mom took the lead and made sure each successive doctor or nurse was aware of what the previous doctor or nurse had suggested, said, or done. She also made sure they were of the information that Mom and Dad brought with them.

Concern over the possibility of Dad's heart stopping, led to a (large group) decision to place a temporary pacing wire to serve as a “temporary pacemaker”, specifically to ensure that Dad's heart would not stop. The wire was strung through Dad's jugular vein Tuesday night and began sending regular electrical impulses immediately to keep Dad's heart rate at 60. The intent was/is to keep Dad safe while they attempt to determine the root cause of what’s going on. In addition to the pacing wire, Dad had multiple (three!) IV ports placed in his arms. All of this was very hard for Liam and Mom to witness. And, eventually leaving Dad in the hospital was brutal, especially for Mom.

Unfortunately, the presence of the wire prevents Dad from getting a heart MRI, which would have been extremely helpful in determining the root cause of the heart block. One of the doctors who saw Dad at the beginning of the adventure noted this, and, although Mom reminded the subsequent groups of doctors of this, they decided that the risk of Dad's heart stopping was too great to allow him to sleep through the night without the wire to get the MRI in the morning.

One other unfortunate byproduct of the pacing wire is that it prevents Dad from getting out of bed, as there is a risk that the wire will move and perforate his heart. Mom and Dad immediately came up with a plan for Dad to do reasonably mild exercises in bed. Neither of them had any clue how long Dad would be literally tethered to the bed.
